                     Strategies To Build Healthy Self-Esteem

Students, just like many people in society, struggle with self-esteem issues on a daily
basis, since our self-esteem can affect almost everything we do. Self-esteem is the
opinion we develop about ourselves in terms of our ability to meet the many
challenges of life, and achieve happiness and success. Self-esteem relates to so many
areas of our life that we can have high self-esteem in one aspect, and low self-esteem
in another. High self-esteem also makes us somewhat “immune” to psychological
distress and therefore, we can’t have too much of it. Some people believe that if our
self-esteem is too high we will become arrogant, but this is not the case. With true
self-esteem comes humility. The following describes common characteristics of
people with high and low self-esteem.

People with high self-esteem tend to:

       Love themselves, and feel worthy of love by others.
       Act in an independent fashion.
       Achieve greater success in life.
       Assume responsibility for their lives, and their choices.
       Take more risks in life.
       Be more creative artistically, and as problem solvers.
       Feel proud of their accomplishments.
       Accept who they are, flaws and all.
       Not be self-centered or egotistical.
       Deal with problems using healthy coping strategies.
       Tolerate greater levels of frustration.
       Be excited by the future, and meet it with a sense of optimism.

On the other hand, people with low self-esteem tend to:

       Feel unworthy of love and respect.
       Avoid attempting new activities for fear of failure.
       Constantly fear rejection.
       Put down their own abilities and skills.
       Achieve less success in life (or become over-achievers).
       Be passive in their interactions with others.
       Blame others for their problems and mistakes.
       Constantly seek out the approval of others.
       Have poorly defined self-identities, and instead change to fit in to the
        situation.
       Be anxious and insecure around others.
       Use addictive behaviors (i.e., drugs, alcohol, food, sex, gambling, smoking,
        shopping, work, etc.) to cope with their painful feelings.
       Be filled with many kinds of fears, particularly about the future.

Given all the potential benefits of having higher self-esteem, the question then
becomes can we do anything to raise it and, if so, how? The answer to the first
question is that self-esteem is indeed affected by the daily choices we make, and by
the actions we take. The following strategies can help you raise your self-esteem.

1.   Develop consistent self-care activities
     Just as how others treated us in the past impacted significantly on our self-
     esteem, how we treat ourselves everyday influences how we value ourselves.
     Self-care includes such things as: eating a healthy diet, getting optimal amounts
     of sleep, doing regular exercise, practicing good hygiene, taking time to do
     things you enjoy, wearing clothes that you really like, treating yourself well each
     day, and making your living space somewhere you really enjoy to be. Feeling
     out of shape, exhausted, unattractive, and unhappy leaves us very vulnerable to
     feelings of insecurity.

2.   Keep a record of all of your accomplishments
     Accumulate all of your accomplishments and put them in a scrapbook, file,
     drawer, chest or room. This may include: trophies, awards, certificates,
     transcripts, diplomas, degrees, cards of appreciation, or other documents which
     in some way recognize you. Remember also, you don’t need to focus on just
     your monumental accomplishments, but you can keep a list of more minor
     victories. Then spend some time at least once a week looking at these
     accomplishments and congratulating yourself for this success.

3.   Develop a list of your strengths or positive qualities
     Write out a list of all the strengths you possess and then add to it as you
     recognize new ones. Then post this list on your refrigerator, bathroom mirror, or
     other visible location to remind yourself of these strengths and qualities.

4.   Ask for feedback from people who know and appreciate you
     One of the best ways to improve your self image is to get honest and accurate
     feedback from people who know and value you. As well, once you ask for the
     feedback, fight the urge to discount it, since this is a common response for
     anyone who isn’t used to positive feedback. Most people would be willing to
     take this time with you. Also don’t forget to write down the feedback, so you
     can refer back to it at times you are struggling.

5.   Indulge yourself in activities you enjoy
     By indulging yourself, you are communicating to yourself that you deserve to be
     treated well. This could include anything you love doing like: reading, going to
     a movie, seeing a friend, having a nap, playing with a pet, going for a walk,
     riding a bike or getting a massage. The list is endless, depending on what you
     enjoy.

6.   Quit comparing yourself to others
     Comparing yourself to others might help your self-esteem, if you in fact compare
     yourself to people who are less skilled or talented than you are. However, most
     people who struggle with self-esteem issues do the opposite and compare
     themselves to others who excel in the areas they value, and therefore end up
     feeling defeated. Instead, compare yourself to yourself and look for the progress
     you have made in your pursuit of competence and success.

7.   Fill your life with healthy, positive and supportive people
     Leave or distance yourself from any relationship that does not support your
     healthy sense of self, particularly with people who are highly negative and
     unsupportive. It is difficult to support your own sense of self when others are
     tearing it down.

8.   Set yourself up for success
     Seek out situations and opportunities where you have a high probability of
     success. However, make sure that some of these situations test your abilities to
     give yourself a true sense of accomplishment. When you are successful,
     celebrate your success rather than simply moving on to another challenge.
9.   Don’t dwell on your weaknesses
     Accept the fact that every human being has weaknesses and that they are
     inevitable. Just look around you and you will easily discover this. It’s not just
     you. No matter how much you try to eliminate your weaknesses, they will exist,
     so instead accept them. At least accept most of them and if you really feel
     motivated to do so, isolate a few and work on them if they are indeed
     changeable.

10. Let go of perfectionism
     Feeling like you need to be perfect robs you of the opportunity to appreciate
     your daily accomplishments and achievements if they are not up to your
     unrealistic expectations. If the only time you feel good about yourself is when
     you have a perfect performance, this will be rare. You have the ability to lower
     your expectations for yourself and by doing so, your self-esteem can soar. View
     mistakes as simply opportunities to learn, not a reason to beat yourself up.

11. Replace negative self-talk with positive self-statements
     What we tell ourselves day after day is what we come to believe. This being the
     case, we need to create a new, more positive script for ourselves. Stop listening
     to your inner critical voice and if you like, even give your critical voice a name
     so that you can begin to see it as something separate from yourself. Foster a new
     voice which is more positive, self-accepting and supportive.

12. Develop and use daily affirmations
     Daily affirmations are self-statements that you have usually written down and
     can repeat to yourself on a daily basis. Some typical self-esteem building
     affirmations include:
      Despite my weaknesses, I accept myself.
      I accept my thoughts, feelings, beliefs and values, even if they are different
       than other people’s.
      I do not have to be perfect to love and appreciate myself, or be loved and
       appreciated by others.
      I am successful in many aspects of my life and need to remind myself to
       focus on these.
      I am a unique individual and will be appreciated by others for this.
      Mistakes are simply a unique opportunity to learn; I can’t be afraid of them.
     I have the power to forgive myself for past mistakes.
     I am worthy of other’s respect.
     I am responsible for my own choices and have an obligation to myself to
      fulfill my needs (when my needs are fulfilled, I will best be able to help
      others).
     I have a right to stand up for my rights, beliefs, values, opinions and feelings
      and need to do so in a very assertive manner.
     I am the only person who can choose my purposes and goals in life; no one
      else can decide my future.
     I need to strive for moral consistency, practice what I preach, keep my
      promises and honor my commitments.
     I am able to achieve the basic challenges of life.
      If these affirmations do not fit you, sit down and write out what you think you
      need to hear from yourself to build your sense of self.

13. Be aware of your own needs and meet them
    To the degree that we are aware of our needs and meet them, we are
    communicating to ourselves that we are valuable. By disregarding our needs, we
    are saying to ourselves that we don’t matter and other people will see this as
    well, and potentially take advantage of us. When our needs are being met, we
    are healthy, both on a physical and emotional level.

14. Be assertive with the people in your life
    Assertiveness builds self-esteem because it communicates back to yourself that
    your needs, values and beliefs are important. This means expressing your
    feelings in a way that is open and honest, but still respects the other person.
    Each time you are assertive, your self-esteem grows a little bit.

15. Live your life with purpose and goals
    Setting and achieving goals builds self-esteem. Living a life that is aimless and
    purposeless gives no sense of achievement, which does not build your sense of
    self. As well, do not let others, such as your parents, establish your goals and
    purpose in life. They will rarely fit for you and will ultimately lead to
    unhappiness and failure. You need to set a goal, develop a plan of action,
    implement the plan, and evaluate your success.

16. Take responsibility for your life and your choices
    Too often in today’s world, people, particularly students, have not learned to
    take responsibility for their lives and their choices, and end up relying on their
    parents to continue to be responsible for many aspects of their existence. These
    could be related to financial issues, vocational direction, life happiness and life
    choices, to mention a few. Self- responsibility for these matters can be difficult
    at first, but when achieved, builds our sense of self.

17. Determine what you can change and what you can not
    If your discontentment with yourself relates to aspects of yourself that you can
    change, then develop a plan for improvement and execute it. If instead it is
    related to something you can not change (i.e., such as your age, height,
    intelligence, family background, etc.), then you need to develop a sense of
    acceptance. Put your energy where it will be most likely to pay off.

18. Make a decision to help others
    Helping others, whether it is through your job, by volunteering, or through
    donating, fills us with a sense of pride and accomplishment. This
    accomplishment in turn, feeds our positive sense of self.

19. Live your life consciously
    To cope with feelings or events, many people live their lives in denial on many
    levels. Unfortunately, we can not effectively deal with what we are not
    conscious of, and then we give ourselves a reason to beat ourselves up when
    issues are not resolved. By being conscious of everything that is happening, in
    both our inner world and the outer world, we can more effectively deal with
    things, which in turn builds self-esteem.

20. Strive for moral consistency
    What this means is that we need to make choices that are consistent with our
    values and moral code. Each time we make a choice which is inconsistent with
    our values, our self-esteem takes a beating. This includes honoring our
    commitments, keeping our promises and practicing what we preach.

21. Meet age related developmental tasks
    To feel good about yourself as a young adult, you need to take on and meet
    many developmental tasks, including:
     Developing your individual identity and autonomy.
     Becoming independent from your family.
     Learning to manage basic life tasks (i.e., financial, household, school, work,
      etc.).
     Developing healthy intimate relationships.
     Establishing a variety of social networks.
     Shifting your relationship with your parents from child/adult to adult/adult.

22. Reward your achievements

    Too often we focus on our failures and ignore our achievements. Instead, find a
    way to celebrate or reward what you have accomplished by: giving yourself a
    break, treating yourself with your favorite food, going on a holiday, doing one of
    your favorite activities, allowing yourself time to relax, spending time with a
    friend or verbally complimenting yourself, to mention a few ideas.




                            Written by Dr. Kim Maertz
                              Mental Health Centre
                              University of Alberta
